---
layout: page
permalink: /math111f22/
title: MATH 111 - Basic College Mathematics - Fall 2022
description: Basic College Mathematics is a basic algebra course.  Upon successful completion of the course students should be able to recall basic mathematical terms related to linear, quadratic, exponential, and logarithmic functions and express these terms in correct context.  Students should be able to apply the methods of algebra to solve applications involving intercepts, rates of change, inequalities, systems of equations, and interest growth.  In addition, students should be able to verbally interpret relationships in data given as graphs, tables, and equations and express functions given in verbal context as a graph, table, or equation.

---
## Prerequisites

- Qualification through the Math Assessment of Prerequisites (MAP) test score of 4 or higher.

## Reference

- Stewart, Redlin, and Watson, College Algebra, 7th Edition, 2016. ISBN: 978-1-305-11554-5 *(eBook strongly recommended)*

## Learning objectives

- Factor various polynomial expressions using the methods:  finding a common factor; using special formulas, including difference of squares and sum or difference of cubes; factoring a quadratic whose leading coefficient is 1; factoring a quadratic whose leading coefficient is not 1; and factor by grouping.

- Solve polynomial equations using factoring and solve quadratic equations using factoring, completing the square, and the quadratic formula.
	
- Work effectively with rational expressions including simplification of sums, differences, products, and quotients and solving equations involving rational expressions.
	
- Use order of operations, properties of exponents, function notation, properties of logarithms
	
- Find and interpret the average rate of change of a function using an equation, a table of values, or an equation.

- Write the equation of a linear or exponential function using two points, a table of 	values, or a general description of the function.  Write equations of vertical, horizontal, parallel, and perpendicular lines.

- Distinguish between the growth or decay of linear and exponential functions.
	
- Solve real-world applications involving linear and exponential functions.
Differentiate between interest compounded annually, interest compounded continuously, and other types of compound interest.  

- Convert from one form to the other and understand the difference between the nominal and effective rates.

## Tentative schedule

### Week - Sections - Topic
- 0 -- P.1 -- Modeling the Real World with Algebra and Real Numbers
- 1 -- P.2-P.5 -- Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation, Rational Exponents and Radicals and Algebraic Expressions
- 2 -- P.6-P.7 -- Factoring, Rational Expressions
- 3 -- P.8-P.9 -- Solving Basic Equations, Modeling with Equations
- 4 -- 1.1, 1.3 -- The Coordinate Plane, Lines
- 5 -- 1.4, 1.6 -- Solving Quadratic Equations, Solving Other Types of Equations
- 6 -- 1.7, 1.10 -- Solving Inequalities, Modeling Variation
- 7 - 2.1-2.2 -- Functions, Graphs of Functions
- 8 -- 2.3-2.4 -- Getting Information from the Graph of a Function, Average Rate of Change of a Function
- 9 -- 2.5-2.6 -- Linear Functions and Models, Transformations of Functions 
- 10 -- 2.7-2.8, 3.1 -- Combining Functions, One-to-One Functions and Their Inverses, Quadratic Functions and Models
- 11 -- 3.2, 4.1-4.3 -- Polynomial Functions and Their Graphs, Exponential Functions and The Natural Exponential Function, Logarithmic Functions
- 12 -- 4.4-4.6 -- Laws of Logarithms, Exponential and Logarithmic Equations, Modeling with Exponential Functions
- 13 -- 5.1 -- Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables
- 14 -- Review for the Final Exam


## Examination dates

- Exam 1 on Sept. 19 2022 -- P.1-P.9, 1.1, 1.3 
- Exam 2 on Oct. 24, 2022 -- 1.4, 1.6-1.7, 1.10, 2.1-2.6
- Exam 3 on Nov. 21, 2022 -- 2.7-2.8, 3.1-3.2, 4.1-4.6, 5.1
- Final Exam on TBA -- Cumulative

## Examination information

- All tests will be administered during the face-to-face class session.

- Make-up exams will be available in the event of documented illness/family emergency. Those with acceptable excuses must contact me within 24 hours of the scheduled exam time to schedule a make-up. Tests given in class must be made up in person.
	
- All three tests and the final exam will be a combination of short answer questions and applications where you will work out math problems.  You will be graded based on a completely correct solution – not just the final answer.  All steps must be correct for full credit.

## Homework information

- Graded Assignments will be given once a week and graded via WebAssign. Students must complete each assignment online before the due date. The lowest graded assignment grade will be dropped regardless of excuse.  

- If you have a legitimate excuse for missing more than one graded assignment, please come talk to me. If you miss a question on a Graded Assignment, you will have 2 more chances to get the question correct, but you will not be able to view tutorials or hints.  Graded assignments are usually due on Sunday before midnight.  

- You will be able to access the key to these solutions after the due date, and you should review the problems you missed before the quiz on Wednesday.

## Quiz information

- Quizzes will be given weekly during the face-to-face class session and will be based on the homework. The lowest quiz grade will be dropped regardless of excuse. 

- If you miss more than one quiz, make-up quizzes will be available for those with documented excuses, but you must contact me within 24 hours of the scheduled quiz time to schedule a make-up. Make-up quizzes must be taken in person. 

- Quizzes will be 3-5 problems and should take between 10-15 minutes at the end of class. Questions will be a combination of short answer questions and applications where you will work out math problems. You will be graded based on a completely correct solution – not just the final answer. All steps must be correct for full credit. One can expect quizzes on Wednesdays each week (unless there is an excuse).

## Grading policy

### Breakdown

- Homework and quizzes -- 25%
- Exam 1 -- 15%
- Exam 2 -- 15%
- Exam 3 -- 15%
- Final -- 30%

### Schema

- A -- 90-100
- B+ -- 85-89  
- B -- 80-84  
- C+ -- 75-79  
- C -- 70-74
- D+ -- 65-69 
- D -- 60-64
- F -- 0-60

## Attendance

- Regular attendance and participation is expected. In accordance with university policy, a letter grade may be deducted for each 10% of classes missed (unexcused). Any student wishing to withdraw from the class should do so by Wednesday, November 2.  Students dropping after this date will receive a WF for the course.      

## Academic integrity

- Your work in this course is expected to be your own.  The University's commitment to academic integrity is enshrined in the Carolinian Creed and is detailed at the Office of Academic Integrity (https://www.sa.sc.edu/academicintegrity/).  Information on violations of academic honesty and integrity and the University's punishments for these violations can be found under Sanctions.
	
- It is your responsibility to be aware of and adhere to the Honor Code Policy.  The Carolinian's Creed calls every student to "practice personal and academic integrity."  The University expects students to adhere steadfastly to truthfulness and to avoid dishonesty, fraud, or deceit.  Cheating, plagiarism, lying, and bribery are examples of breaches in this code found in the classroom.  Students violating this principle or who assist others in violating it are subject to disciplinary action.

- Breaches of academic integrity will, at a minimum, result in the failure of that assignment.
